Michael Franz: Hello everyone. Welcome to while I guess the first substantive lecture of the semester. I'm excited to be talking today about
Michael Franz: Election rules, a variety of election rules and there's tons of things that we could consider and talk about. I'm going to talk about
Michael Franz: Things that I think are very particularly important about the rules and encourage you to to use this lecture to help you look through some of the resources on our course page.
Michael Franz: Class resources page about how to find out election rules in your assigned state in the race that you've been assigned in the state that that take is taking place. Look up the rules, as we'll discuss them today and and and try to make sense of all the various the various pieces.
Michael Franz: I i'm going to show you
Michael Franz: My plan for the
Michael Franz: For the day and
Michael Franz: Today we're going to be talking about voting rules and I'm going to walk us through a couple of things that I'm really interested in
Michael Franz: And and then show you some links on our Blackboard page. So the first thing that I'm really interested in, and I want to talk about is the one person, one vote rule. And this is perhaps one of the most dramatic.
Michael Franz: Changes in American politics that also does not get understood or covered or appreciated enough. And this is the, the requirement as set by the Supreme Court in the 1960s that legislative districts
Michael Franz: Have equal roughly equal as close to equal as possible populations in them when states draw district lines. So as, as you might know every 10 years United States has a census.
Michael Franz: And that census counts every person living in the United States and that determines how many legislative districts congressional districts that are in each state.
Michael Franz: And it determines how many people should be allocated to each legislative district as they're drawn and then the redistricting process begins, which is it's contentious enough
Michael Franz: But one of the requirements of the redistricting process. Every 10 years is to draw districts, such that they have equal populations in them as close as they possibly can.
Michael Franz: And so that wasn't always the case. If you look at the United States Constitution, the one person, one vote standard. In other words, the standard of their being equal populations in legislative districts is not written into the Constitution.
Michael Franz: And for many, many years over 100 plus years legislative districts contains many different population sizes.
Michael Franz: For lots of different reasons. We got into the 1960s, there have been many Americans over the course of the first half of the 1950s, that had moved from farms and from the countryside into the cities and the cities are more packed than they'd ever been.
Michael Franz: Well, rural areas across the country weren't super, super happy about reallocating power from the countryside to the urban centers.
Michael Franz: In many states. And so they refuse to redraw districts and so at the state level and for federal House races. There were oftentimes
Michael Franz: Many legislative districts state legislative office and congressional districts that have vastly different populations in them.
Michael Franz: Some rural districts in fact had very few people in them. And we're still electing a member to the statehouse the state senate still sending someone to Congress from that state.
Michael Franz: And then the urban districts were packed with people, way more people than in rural districts and this mismatch of power was finally adjudicated by the Supreme Court in the 1960s.
Michael Franz: And then Supreme Court ruled in a couple of cases that in fact district size with respect to population needed to be as equal as possible. And this reallocated power.
Michael Franz: From the, from the countryside from rural areas to the cities where there were more people because those cities ended up getting as a result we're districts
Michael Franz: This is huge and we take for granted the one person, one vote standard today, but it was not a principle of constitutional principle that
Michael Franz: Was in place for any real time period before the 1960s. Now we don't see it in the US Senate, which has constitutional protection of unequal populations across states.
Michael Franz: But that's really the only place besides the Electoral College, where we see some mismatch, given the extras college actual votes get that small states get because of Senate.
Michael Franz: But the US Senate is really the only place where that mismatch and population size can continue now we can see some of this in this graph, which I posted to our Blackboard page and which looks at the distribution of votes in congressional races US House races between 1932 and six.
Michael Franz: And it shows the standard deviation, which is a measure of how much spread or range. There is a set of data across congressional districts in states.
Michael Franz: In each election cycle. And it turns out that in many. In fact, many
Michael Franz: States prior to the 1960s. Some States used at large districts. So, for example, take the state of Maine, which has to congressional districts, given its population.
Michael Franz: And that large district. Well, let's say it had three or any state that has three
Michael Franz: might decide to split the state up into two congressional districts and elect their third member of Congress statewide. So the district quote unquote net sense would be the state itself.
Michael Franz: And so you'd vote for someone to the US House that represented the whole state. In addition to voting for your geographic
Michael Franz: Member of Congress because of that many members of Congress were elected with statewide vote totals.
Michael Franz: And others were elected with just constituency or geographic district wide vote totals. And so if you look at the range. In this case, the standard deviation of votes cast across districts in a state in a year.
Michael Franz: You see before the 1960s, the ranges in many states could be huge, because of these at large statewide districts or because of districts size differences in population between urban areas and and dense.
Michael Franz: dense urban area dense urban areas and rural areas. What's dramatic is the change after the Supreme Court decisions in the 1960s, which impose mandates that states.
Michael Franz: reallocate votes equally across districts and that happened and what this one of the dramatic powerful effects of the court case almost
Michael Franz: Instantaneously. After those court cases were decided as states complied.
Michael Franz: Went back to the drawing board and redrew districts that were equal in size. They did this in the middle of the 1960s. It took them a number of years, but they did it.
Michael Franz: And then they fixed their districts again after the 1970 census. And since the late 1960s. We haven't seen that kind of these kinds of
Michael Franz: Vote ranges, as we did in the 1930s and before through the 1950s and early 1960s, and so
Michael Franz: It's important. Remember that this particular rule was set in place by the Supreme Court, not by Congress and not by constitutional demand, but by the court, which established that the mismatch votes cast across districts was an unfair voting practice that violated certain people's
Michael Franz: voting power rights and it was justified under the 14th Amendment, which is the 14th Amendment demands equal protection of the laws.
Michael Franz: The Senate is understood in a modern way as an institution that does not protect each voters equal voting power.
Michael Franz: My voting power and name the impact. I'll have and voting for Collins or Gideon, and this election cycle will have huge impacts on the outcome of the senate race that mismatch.
Michael Franz: Is mismatched is much more powerful as an individual vote then someone's vote for Senate race in California or Texas.
Michael Franz: And that's constitutionally allowed. It's not going to change unless we change the constitution.
Michael Franz: But you can see it take place in the Senate, and it was not uncommon to see similar mismatches, and House races, which have now been for all intents and purposes eliminated and that's a rule that we now follow and is incredibly powerful. So I wanted to start with that.
Michael Franz: The book covers that and talks a little bit about the one person, one vote standard we throw it around so commonly but it's important to remember its origins
Michael Franz: The next thing I want to talk about. And I'm going to use the case of Connecticut as an example in a few minutes is to talk about variations and voting raw and voting laws.
Michael Franz: In a variety of functions. There's voter registration rules in most states you register to vote when you turn 18 or when you move to the state and when you want to start voting, you have to fill out paperwork and register to vote.
Michael Franz: In some states, you can vote early
Michael Franz: And there are variations in voting laws across states on early voting rights or early voting opportunities or you can vote absentee in most states, but there are variations across states and what you need to do in order to get an absentee ballot.
Michael Franz: If you get an absentee ballot, you get it mailed to you and you can mail those back but some states are also mailing people regular ballots not absentee ballots. This cycle.
Michael Franz: In order to mail back before the election. This has been controversial, as you know, there's certain voter identification loss or voter ID laws in some states that require you to show up with an ID. In some states, you don't have to show up with an ID, like a name.
Michael Franz: There's currently negation about the impact of the coven 19 issue on these voting laws and we'll talk about some in the case of Connecticut and also in rare cases article
Michael Franz: Where he talks about this in a variety of ways. And then there's variations in laws around whether whether felons or people with criminal records can vote.
Michael Franz: And there is no uniform principle on this across the country. Different states have different laws and whether or not if you've been convicted of a crime, you lose your voting rights or whether you keep them or can we gain them when you're out of prison.
Michael Franz: And these are all very, very important ways that we can access the ballot.
Michael Franz: And if you move you will face different different rules for you.
Michael Franz: Now, of course, I don't know if you can hear this but there's a car alarm going off down the street, as I as I talk. And so my apologies if that's happening.
Michael Franz: Car Alarms are so rare in my neighborhood that of course it would happen as I was filming. So I apologize for that. Maybe you can't hear it but I sure can. It just stopped.
Michael Franz: Okay, so we'll talk about the case of of Connecticut. Just a second.
Michael Franz: And then I want to just make a couple of comments about the Rick hasten article and we can talk about this next week as well.
Michael Franz: But Rick case and points out, and importantly he points out that there is no affirmative real constitutional right to vote in the United States Constitution and this this oftentimes strikes people as somewhat amazing
Michael Franz: Which is that of course voting is core to American and all democratic systems core, you can't have a democracy without voting.
Michael Franz: On the other hand,
Michael Franz: And in the Constitution. There are provisions that protect voting rights against infringement. You can't take voting rights away on the basis of race or gender young people are enfranchised there are no limitations, put on your voting rights around poll taxes or literacy tests.
Michael Franz: You do have with the 14th Amendment equal protection of the laws and you can claim on equal protection of of laws that you think disenfranchise you
Michael Franz: But there's no affirmative statement in the Constitution that establishes citizens rights to vote and so that leaves a lot of things open to litigation and to judicial interpretation and interpretation and the case and talks about this and he also talks about
Michael Franz: Largely the negatives of federalism in a case like a global pandemic, where you have thousands and thousands of electoral bodies across the country administering elections now in my first lecture.
Michael Franz: I pointed out that this was a plus I pointed out that across the states. There are over 130 or 148 pending on election cycles elections administered by states in congressional primaries and presidential primaries in an election year.
Michael Franz: The States administer these elections. And so this is an incredible feat of democracy is what I said. And that's I think a plus of federalism, but
Michael Franz: A negative a minus of federalism is that it's extremely desegregated not only the state's run elections, but they're desegregated further to your local town.
Michael Franz: Or municipality and Town Clerk's and cities or towns like Brunswick.
Michael Franz: Are the ones that do the hard work of collecting ballots administering the ballots running the voting places responding to voter questions and so on and
Michael Franz: That can mean when states have different laws and different Town Clerk's or county clerks have different procedures.
Michael Franz: That the desegregation the benefits of a federal system like this can also make things more complicated when the laws are not applied evenly, or the same across constituencies and hasten talks about this, especially as it relates to the rules.
Michael Franz: In an uncertain time like now. Now he mentioned two real principles that are worth remembering, and this is first the Anderson Burke berdych test and the democracy cannon and they're both roughly the same thing.
Michael Franz: But the Anderson berdych test is a more of a of a jurisprudential principle. What I mean by that is, the courts have used this test to help them make decisions.
Michael Franz: And in general, what the Court says or what the courts Federal courts have have tried to do with this test is say
Michael Franz: When it appears as if state laws put undue or perhaps substantial pressures on voters when those new laws are implemented and seem to
Michael Franz: make things harder for voters to vote, the harder those laws are the more challenging those laws are in voting.
Michael Franz: The test applies a standard that says as those laws get harder for individuals to vote, the burden of proof on states should go up.
Michael Franz: And so the burden of proof should be on the states to show that these laws are necessary.
Michael Franz: And hasten talks about them as passing strict scrutiny and that means that they have to be extremely justified.
Michael Franz: And if there's no sort of extreme justification for an infringement on rights voting rights than the state should not get
Michael Franz: The benefit of the doubt the state law should, in many ways, oftentimes be overturned. So the Anderson berdych test will put the burden of proof on states as the burden on voters to vote goes up.
Michael Franz: The democracy Canada similar in the sense that a democracy cannon is that when there's vagueness in the law when the laws unclear about
Michael Franz: What is or isn't allowed someone who follows a democracy canon perspective would give the benefit of the doubt to the voter and not the state. And so if it's unclear whether the law meant that you should do X or do why
Michael Franz: Democracy cannon would say, or if you follow the democracy can you would choose the path that makes voting easier for voters and not harder.
Michael Franz: You'd give the sort of benefit to the voter and not the state.
Michael Franz: Or to making it easier versus making it harder. And so you can see how both the Anderson verdict test and the democracy can and essentially would like to break ties.
Michael Franz: On behalf of easier voting and make it harder for states to justify tough laws in this area. That's what hasten would like to see that perspective play out more often in these cases and
Michael Franz: And he's upset when the courts. Some courts don't in fact follow that principle or those principles.
Michael Franz: So let's look at and let me come back for just a second here. Let's look at some state laws if we can. And what I'm going to do is follow along.
Michael Franz: In some of the links that I've posted for us using the state of Connecticut as an example. And I'm not going to get into the detailed weeds of the State of Connecticut, but to show you the links. And what you can see when you go to those links.
Michael Franz: Um,
Michael Franz: Let's see here. Before I do that I need to remember
Michael Franz: To do that, so thank you. As I get used to all of these things.
Michael Franz: Okay, so I'm going to show you just section A, but it says I mentioned before, identical in Section be in class resources, we're going to look at the state of Connecticut by looking at all the of these links.
Michael Franz: And so when and how to vote in all 50 states. What a nice name for a link
Michael Franz: And this shows us a map of the vote by Rule vote by mail rules across the states and you'll see here that some states in these darker purple have decided to mail ballots to all active voters in in 2020 and some of them do these do this.
Michael Franz: Anyway, and you can vote in person. If you want or you can simply mail back the ballot when it comes to you don't have to request it. It just, it just comes to you, but there are a lot of states in these lighter
Michael Franz: Purple, if you will, color that have changed their rules because of coven 19 and Connecticut is one of those one of those states. And then there are states that still require you to have an excuse for voting by mail. And that's been a bit of a bit of a controversy. Now excuse
Michael Franz: Comes up in many different ways. What does. Excuse me. And what counts for an excuse. And that has not
Michael Franz: It has been an issue in Connecticut as well.
Michael Franz: But you know it. None of this is always simple so but many states require an affirmative excuse. Others are allowing coven to be a sort of blanket excuse if you will. And the issue in Texas and other states is whether or not
Michael Franz: coven 19 and sickness can apply to you, even if you're not sick, right. So if you're sick.
Michael Franz: That's a perfect excuse why can't show up on election day. But what if you're afraid of getting sick. Does that count as an excuse. So there's a link down here to all the states and information about nailing vote. So in Connecticut.
Michael Franz: You can apply for an absentee ballot by mail or in person and you can
Michael Franz: Request to get a ballot as late as November 2 although it needs to be postmarked by November 3 in order for it to count. So you have a pretty
Michael Franz: long period of time to request the ballot. If you click on this, you'll get the state link for requesting an absentee ballot, you'll see that in the State of Connecticut. They have decided to
Michael Franz: Mail the ballot to every eligible voter in the state preemptively because of the coven issue and
Michael Franz: So the Secretary of State is sending everyone these absentee ballots. Now this is a slightly out of date link.
Michael Franz: Because you'll see here that the date of primary was August 11 2020. And in fact, as I'll show you in a second. There were some court cases about
Michael Franz: Whether this same approach should apply to the November election and it didn't at first and then the state of Connecticut passed a law that applied this particular approach to the November election as well.
Michael Franz: And that was to mail everybody an absentee ballot preemptively and to tell everybody that when they want to request an absentee ballot, they could select the coven 19 box as
Michael Franz: As an excuse for for requesting an absentee ballot and at the time it was because of executive order seven QQ in the State of Connecticut.
Michael Franz: But it also turned into a State law, the state passed a law in July through a special session of the state legislature that allowed all voters to vote absentee because of coven 19 in the November.
Michael Franz: Election at well as well. Normally you would request an absentee ballot and have to indicate one of these issues around
Michael Franz: Around requesting and getting an absentee ballot coven 19 would not be on the list in a normal year and you'd have to say that you were ill or you have a religious tenant or you have some other duty that day or a physical disability, so forth.
Michael Franz: So you can fill that out.
Michael Franz: Send it back.
Michael Franz: Or deliver it to your town clerk and they'll mail you a ballot.
Michael Franz: And you can do that as far as November 2 the elections on November 3 as long as you get it in the mail by the election day, then you should be okay. And of course, that's an issue that many people have had with whether or not their vote would get counted if it
Michael Franz: Arrived after election day in Connecticut. It just needs to be postmarked by election day.
Michael Franz: So more info on how to vote, you can click on how to how to vote. And so if I click on this and I go to Connecticut.
Michael Franz: You'll see they provide me some information here about voting in Connecticut to register in Connecticut, you have to be a citizen of the United States, a resident of Connecticut.
Michael Franz: 17 years old and if you're 17 years old who will be 18 honor before election day, you can participate in the general election and and the primary election. And that's not true in every state.
Michael Franz: You have completed confinement and parole if previously convicted of a felony.
Michael Franz: And had your voting rights restored by the registrar's voters. So there's some action. You must take if you've been in confinement, or on parole and again in some states that doesn't apply. In some states, you lose your voting rights forever.
Michael Franz: You can vote in person on election day, or you can mail back your absentee ballot, but there is no early voting in the State of Connecticut.
Michael Franz: And that's important to note that in some states they have early voting laws where you will be able to vote on a Saturday or any other day that the State Sets up sort of early voting opportunities.
Michael Franz: In Connecticut. There's no early voting opportunities. You can only vote in person or you can request an absentee ballot and, as noted prior to coven 19 and requesting an absentee ballot.
Michael Franz: You, you had to have some sort of excuse you could always lie about what the excuse was nobody was going to check on it, but there was no such thing as no excuse absentee voting and can't get
Michael Franz: In order to vote. You do not need to vote. You do not need an ID. However, you will be asked to show an ID in Connecticut.
Michael Franz: According to Connecticut rules and you can bring a social security card or a driver's license or something like that. But if you don't have an ID. It is not a strict voter ID state, you will simply be asked to sign an affidavit that says you are you okay so you
Michael Franz: You don't have to have a prescribes specific ID, but you you do, you do have to claim that you're you in the state of Maine. For example, you just say who you are and they check you off the list and give you a ballot.
Michael Franz: But in Connecticut, you have to sign something that says you're you. And so you know that's that's some affirmative restriction on your on your voting access, but it's not super, super stringent.
Michael Franz: Voter Registration rules by state, you can. There's nothing
Michael Franz: Super specific in here but you can see that you can access information through the US election assistance Commission and in Connecticut to register to vote.
Michael Franz: You have to do that with your city or town clerk by October 27 however Connecticut as a state that has same day Election Day or election day registration. So there's sort of a weird
Michael Franz: Gap between October 27 of November 3 where you cannot register to vote, but you can register to vote at the polling place on on election day.
Michael Franz: If you want to register before election day, you have only until the 27th of October to do that. So interesting piece of information.
Michael Franz: Here the early voting rules by state from from this link and you can see Connecticut is not an early voting state.
Michael Franz: And they're in a mix of states that are not early voting states and there's a range of different types of early voting options across the states. If I click all the way down here you can see
Michael Franz: The early voting period. And when it begins and ends up for different states where the locations are and so forth. There's a whole bunch of variation here that you should take note of. That's really super, super, super interesting.
Michael Franz: On the voter ID law side of things. You can see here the evolution of voter ID laws between 2000 and 2016 and in the year in the year 2000 is Conor O'Brian used to say.
Michael Franz: There were a lot of states that no voter ID was required those states have declined over time. And now there's some ID law in in most states.
Michael Franz: Could be non strict could be strict Connecticut is one of the the non strict states, I have to scroll all the way down here to get to the link I think with the map.
Michael Franz: And you can see Connecticut is is a state that has an ID is requested, but a photo is not required. And then there are some states that have
Michael Franz: No document required to vote like in Maine. Okay so variations there as well.
Michael Franz: Connecticut is not a state that has had recent VOTING RESTRICTIONS. This is an older piece that goes back to
Michael Franz: So it does not necessarily encompass 2020
Michael Franz: But you can see that in many states before coven there have been voting restrictions that had been put in place since 2010
Michael Franz: And you can click on these on the link to the PDF to see what those have been across these states Connecticut is not one of them, but they include things like new.
Michael Franz: Voter ID restrictions limitations of early voting and so forth. So we've seen a sort of parallel track in many states where it's become easier to vote. Some ways harder to vote in some states in other ways.
Michael Franz: And then there's the voting litigations and I'm just going to mention this, and then I'll be done, which is if you're interested in tracking cases across the states and 2020 as it relates to kovats impact.
Michael Franz: You can do that by clicking on your state here. So I'm gonna go to Connecticut and there's been some interesting
Michael Franz: Little litigation around this issue of voting access, including a court case that was filed in early July by the Connecticut State conference of the NAACP in
Michael Franz: in coalition with league of women voters.
Michael Franz: That sued the State of Connecticut for not applying the coven 19 excuse to the November election. I mentioned that before. So that was filed
Michael Franz: Filed in the district court on July 2 of this year and then the state legislature met in a special session and applied it to the November election. So this case is essentially moot.
Michael Franz: There was another case favor be very
Michael Franz: Narrow and repeating the Merrill, these are three very, very similar cases that were filed by for US Congressional candidates.
Michael Franz: For US Congressional candidates sued the Connecticut Secretary of State challenging the
Michael Franz: Challenging the, the use of coven 19 is a valid reason for requesting an absentee ballot.
Michael Franz: So the complaint was actually that
Michael Franz: Should not be allowed to be used as a valid excuse for requesting an absentee ballot, in effect, the laws that these congressional candidates and down here.
Michael Franz: In repeat versus Merrill to individual voters who are potential and former political candidates and to state legislators who are running for re election so state legislators sued.
Michael Franz: The state of Connecticut for the expansion of the definition of illness to include code at 19, in essence, these candidates were arguing that voters should not be allowed to request an absentee ballot because of their fear of getting coven
Michael Franz: That they should be forced to vote in person or request an absentee ballot for other reasons. And so they were not happy about the expansion of the absentee ballot access
Michael Franz: These cases were dismissed by the Connecticut Supreme Court as not as not valid. They were dismissed pretty summarily and then of course the legislature applied the absentee ballot standard to the November election.
Michael Franz: So there have been some litigation in the State of Connecticut over the summer around this issue. And you can see here with all of these links, the way in which
Michael Franz: Voting access varies in Connecticut, in comparison to two other states. Now, I find that extremely interesting and I didn't know a lot about the state of Connecticut and their voting rules and so
Michael Franz: I encourage you to to look up the state in which you've been assigned to do some digging.
Michael Franz: Some of this will require you to to kind of really puzzle over this. I had to puzzle over the issue of absentee ballots.
Michael Franz: In Connecticut because it wasn't clear to me what the current rules were in a particular it wasn't clear to me that the State of Connecticut had met and special session in July.
Michael Franz: To apply the coven 19 excuse to absentee ballots for the general election. I wasn't able to quite find that information wasn't updated.
Michael Franz: So I just did some digging. It didn't take me too long and I found all of this information about Connecticut that I find to be super interesting. So I encourage you to do the same thing for your state and
Michael Franz: And to come and and and in the next any class in the next number of weeks to add that to the conversation that we have about about the election season. So I'm going to stop.
Michael Franz: Stop there. And, and I hope to see you and I will see you all next week. This week because I'm recording on Friday, and I hope you have a good start to the semester, and I'll talk to you soon.